CHAPTER I.
ECONOMY
LibriVox Part III
In the savage state every family owns a shelter as good as the best, and sufficient for its
coarser and simpler wants.
But I think that I speak within bounds when I say that, though the birds of the air have
their nests, and the foxes their holes, and the savages their wigwams, in modern civilized
society not more than one half the families own a shelter.
In the large towns and cities where civilization especially prevails the number of those who
own a shelter is a very small fraction of the whole.
The rest pay an annual tax for this outside garment of all, become indispensable summer
and winter, which would buy a village of Indian wigwams, but now helps to keep them poor as
long as they live.
I do not mean to insist here on the disadvantage of hiring compared with owning, but it is
evident that the savage owns his shelter because it costs so little, while the civilized man
hires his commonly because he cannot afford to own it, nor can he in the long run any
better afford to hire.
But answers one, by merely paying this tax the poor civilized man secures an abode which
is a palace compared with the savages.
An annual rent of from twenty-five to a hundred dollars, these are the country rates, entitles
him to the benefit of the improvements of centuries, spacious apartments, clean paint
and paper, Rumford fireplace, back plastering, Venetian blinds, copper pump, spring lock,
a commodious cellar, and many other things.
But how happens it that he who is said to enjoy these things is so commonly a poor civilized
man while the savage who has them not is rich as a savage?
If it is asserted that civilization is a real advance in the condition of man, and I think
that it is, though only the wise improve their advantages, it must be shown that it has produced
better dwellings without making them more costly.
And the cost of a thing is the amount of what I will call life which is required to be exchanged
for it, immediately or in the long run.
An average house in this neighborhood costs perhaps eight hundred dollars, and to lay
up this sum will take from ten to fifteen years of the laborer's life, even if he is
not encumbered with a family, estimating the pecuniary value of every man's labor at one
dollar a day, for if some receive more, others receive less, so that he must have spent more
than half his life commonly before his wigwam will be earned.
If we suppose him to pay a rent instead, this is but a doubtful choice of evils.
Would the savage have been wise to exchange his wigwam for a palace on these terms?
It may be guessed that I reduce almost the whole advantage of holding this superfluous
property as a fund in store against the future, so far as the individual is concerned, mainly
to the defraying of funeral expenses, but perhaps a man is not required to bury himself.
Nevertheless, this points to an important distinction between civilized man and the
savage, and no doubt they have designs on us for our benefit in making the life of a
civilized people an institution in which the life of the individual is to a great extent
absorbed in order to preserve and perfect that of the race.
But I wish to show at what a sacrifice this advantage is at present obtained, and to suggest
that we may possibly so live as to secure all the advantage without suffering any of
the disadvantage.
What mean ye by saying that the poor ye have always with you, or that the fathers have
eaten sour grapes and the children's teeth are set on edge?
As I live, saith the Lord God, ye shall not have occasion any more to use this proverb
in Israel.
Behold, all souls are mine.
As the soul of the father soul, also the soul of the son is mine.
The soul that sinneth, it shall die.
When I consider my neighbors, the farmers of Concord, who are at least as well off as
the other classes, I find that for the most part they have been toiling twenty, thirty,
or forty years that they may become the real owners of their farms, which commonly they
have inherited with encumbrances, or else bought with hired money, and we may regard
one third of that toil as the cost of their houses, but commonly they have not paid for
them yet.
It is true.
The encumbrances sometimes outweigh the value of the farm, so that the farm itself becomes
one great encumbrance, and still a man is found to inherit it, being well acquainted
with it, as he says.
On applying to the assessors, I am surprised to learn that they cannot at once name a dozen
in the town who own their farms free and clear.
If you would know the history of these homesteads, inquire at the bank where they are mortgaged.
The man who has actually paid for his farm with labor on it is so rare that every neighbor
can point to him.
I doubt if there are three such men in Concord.
What has been said of the merchants, that a very large majority, even ninety-seven
in a hundred are sure to fail, is equally true of the farmers.
With regard to the merchants, however, one of them says pertinently that a great part
of their failures are not genuine pecuniary failures, but merely failures to fulfill their
engagements, because it is inconvenient.
That is, it is the moral character that breaks down.
But this puts an infinitely worse face on the matter, and suggests, besides, that probably
not even the other three succeed in saving their souls, but are perchance bankrupt in
a worse sense than they who fail honestly.
Bankruptcy and repudiation are the springboards from which much of our civilization vaults
its summer sets, but the savage stands on the unelastic plank of famine.
Yet the middle-sex cattle show goes off here with Iclas annually, as if all the joints
of the agricultural machine were suant.
The farmer is endeavoring to solve the problem of a livelihood by a formula more complicated
than the problem itself.
To get his shoestrings he speculates in herds of cattle.
With consummate skill he has set his trap with a hair-spring to catch comfort and independence,
and then, as he turned away, got his own leg into it.
This is the reason he is poor, and for a similar reason we are all poor in respect to a thousand
savage comforts, though surrounded by luxuries.
As Chapman sings,
And when the farmer has got his house, he may not be the richer but the poorer for it,
and it be the house that has got him.
As I understand it, that was a valid objection urged by Mommus against the house which Minerva
made, that she had not made it movable, by which means a bad neighborhood might be avoided.
And it may still be urged, for our houses are such unwieldy property that we are often
imprisoned rather than housed in them, and the bad neighborhood to be avoided is our
own scurvy selves.
I know one or two families, at least, in this town, who for nearly a generation have been
wishing to sell their houses in the outskirts and move into the village, but have not been
able to accomplish it, and only death will set them free.
Granted that the majority are able, at last, either to own or hire the modern house with
all its improvements.
While civilization has been improving our houses, it has not equally improved the men
who are to inhabit them.
It has created palaces, but it was not so easy to create noblemen and kings.
And if the civilized man's pursuits are no worthier than the savage's, if he is employed
the greater part of his life in obtaining gross necessaries and comforts merely, why
should he have a better dwelling than the former?
But how do the poor minority fare?
Perhaps it will be found that just in proportion, as some have been placed in outward circumstances
above the savage, others have been degraded below him.
The luxury of one class is counterbalanced by the indigence of another.
On the one side is the palace, on the other are the almshouse and silent poor.
The myriads who built the pyramids to be the tombs of the pharaohs were fed on garlic,
and it may be were not decently varied themselves.
The mason who finishes the cornice of the palace returns at night perchance to a hut
not so good as a wigwam.
It is a mistake to suppose that in a country where the usual evidences of civilization
exist the condition of a very large body of the inhabitants may not be as degraded as
that of savages.
I refer to the degraded poor, not now to the degraded rich.
To know this, I should not need to look farther than to the shanties which everywhere border
our railroads, that last improvement in civilization, where I see in my daily walks human beings
living in sties, and all winter with an open door, for the sake of light, without any visible,
often imaginable, wood-pile, and the forms of both old and young are permanently contracted
by the long habit of shrinking from cold and misery, and the development of all their limbs
and faculties is checked.
It certainly is fair to look at that class by whose labor the works which distinguish
this generation are accomplished.
Such, too, to a greater or less extent, is the condition of the operatives of every denomination
in England, which is the great workhouse of the world.
Or, I could refer you to Ireland, which is marked as one of the white or enlightened
spots on the map.
Contrast the physical condition of the Irish with that of the North American Indian, or
the South Sea Islander, or any other savage race before it was degraded by contact with
the civilized man.
Yet I have no doubt that that people's rulers are as wise as the average of civilized rulers.
Their condition only proves what squalidness may consist with civilization.
I hardly need refer now to the laborers in our southern states, who produce the staple
exports of this country, and are themselves a staple production of the South, but to confine
myself to those who are said to be in moderate circumstances.
Most men appear never to have considered what a house is, and are actually, though needlessly,
poor all their lives because they think that they must have such a one as their neighbors
have.
As if one were to wear any sort of coat which the tailor might cut out for him, or, gradually
leaving off palm-leaf hat or cap of woodchuck skin, complain of hard times because he could
not afford to buy him a crown.
It is possible to invent a house still more convenient and luxurious than we have, which
yet all would admit that man could not afford to pay for.
Shall we always study to obtain more of these things, and not sometimes to be content with
less?
Shall the respectable citizen thus gravely teach by precept and example the necessity
of the young man's providing a certain number of superfluous glow-shoes and umbrellas and
empty guest chambers for empty guests before he dies?
Why should not our furniture be as simple as the Arabs' or the Indians'?
When I think of the benefactors of the race, whom we have apotheosized as messengers from
heaven, bearers of divine gifts to man, I do not see in my mind that there is no such
any retinue at their heels, any carload of fashionable furniture.
Or what if I were to allow, would it not be a singular allowance, that our furniture should
be more complex than the Arabs' in proportion as we are morally and intellectually his superiors?
At present our houses are cluttered and defiled with it, and a good housewife would sweep
out the greater part into the dust-hole and not leave her morning's work undone.
Morning work! By the blushes of aurora and the music of memnon, what should be man's
property?
Pieces of limestone on my desk, but I was terrified to find that they required to be
dusted daily, when the furniture of my mind was all undusted still, and threw them out
the window in disgust. How then could I have a furnished house? I would rather sit in the
open air, for no dust gathers on the grass, unless where man has broken ground. It is
the luxurious and dissipated who set the fashions which the herd so diligently follow. The traveler
who stops at the best houses so called soon discovers this, for the publicans presume
him to be a sardinopolis, and if he resigned himself to their tender mercies he would soon
be completely emasculated. I think that in the railroad car we are inclined to spend
more on luxury than on safety and convenience, and it threatens without attaining these to
become no better than a modern drawing-room, with its divans and ottomans and sunshades
and a hundred other oriental things, which we are taking west with us, invented for the
ladies of the harem and the effeminate natives of the celestial empire which Jonathan should
be ashamed to know the names of. I would rather sit on a pumpkin and have it all to myself
than be crowded on a velvet cushion. I would rather ride on earth in an ox cart with a
free circulation than go to heaven in the fancy car of an excursion train and breathe
a malaria all the way. The very simplicity and nakedness of man's life in the primitive
ages imply this advantage, at least, that they left him still but a sojourner in nature.
When he was refreshed with food and sleep he contemplated his journey again. He dwelt,
as it were, in a tent in this world, and was either threading the valleys or crossing the
plains or climbing the mountain tops. But lo, men have become the tools of their tools.
The man who independently plucked the fruits when he was hungry has become a farmer, and
he who stood under a tree for shelter a housekeeper. We now no longer camp as for a night, but
have settled down on earth and forgotten heaven. We have adopted Christianity merely
as an improved method of agriculture. We have built for this world a family mansion and
for the next a family tomb. The best works of art are the expression of man's struggle
to free himself from this condition, but the effect of our art is merely to make this low
state comfortable and that higher state to be forgotten. There is actually no place in
this village for a work of fine art, if any had come down to us, to stand. For our lives
our houses and streets furnish no proper pedestal for it. There is not a nail to hang a picture
on or a shelf to receive the bust of a hero or a saint. When I consider how our houses
are built and paid for or not paid for, and their internal economy managed and sustained,
I wonder that the floor does not give way under the visitor while he is admiring the
gougas upon the mantelpiece, and let him through into the cellar to some solid and honest though
earthy foundation. I cannot but perceive that this so-called rich and refined life is a
thing jumped at, and I do not get on in the enjoyment of the fine arts which adorn it,
my attention being wholly occupied with the jump. For I remember that the greatest genuine
leap due to human muscles alone, on record, is that of certain wandering Arabs who are
on level ground. Without factitious support, man is sure to come to earth again beyond
that distance. The first question which I am tempted to put to the proprietor of such
great impropriety is, Who bolsters you? Are you one of the ninety-seven who fail, or the
three who succeed? Answer me these questions, and then perhaps I may look at your baubles
and find them ornamental. The cart before the horse is neither beautiful nor useful.
Before we can adorn our houses with beautiful objects, the walls must be stripped, and our
lives must be stripped, and beautiful housekeeping and beautiful living be laid for a foundation.
Now a taste for the beautiful is most cultivated out of doors, where there is no house and
no housekeeper. Old Johnson, in his wonder-working Providence, speaking of the first settlers
of this town, with whom he was contemporary, tells us that, They burrow themselves in the
earth for their first shelter under some hillside, and, casting the soil aloft upon timber, they
make a smoky fire against the earth at the highest side. They did not provide them houses,
says he, till the earth, by the Lord's blessing, brought forth bread to feed them. And the
first year's crop was so light that, They were forced to cut their bread very thin for
a long season. The Secretary of the Province of New Netherland, writing in Dutch in 1650,
for the information of those who wished to take up land there, states more particularly
that, Those in New Netherland, and especially in New England, who have no means to build
farmhouses, at first, according to their wishes, dig a square pit in the ground, cellar fashion,
six or seven feet deep, as long and as broad as they think proper, case the earth inside
with wood all around the wall, and line the wood with the bark of trees or something else
to prevent the caving in of the earth, floor this cellar with plank, and wainscotted overhead
for a ceiling, raise a roof of spars, clear up, and cover the spars with bark or green
sods, so that they can live dry and warm in these houses with their entire families for
two, three, and four years, it being understood that partitions are run through these cellars
which are adapted to the size of the family. The wealthy and principal men in New England,
in the beginning of the colonies, commenced their first dwelling houses in this fashion
for two reasons. Firstly, in order not to waste time in building, and not to want food
the next season. Secondly, in order not to discourage poor laboring people, whom they
brought over in numbers from fatherland, in the course of three or four years when the
country became adapted to agriculture, they built themselves handsome houses, spending
on them several thousands. In this course which our ancestors took there was a show
of prudence, at least, as if their principle were to satisfy the more pressing wants first.
But are the more pressing wants satisfied now? When I think of acquiring for myself
one of our luxurious dwellings, I am deterred, for, so to speak, the country is not yet adapted
to human culture, and we are still forced to cut our spiritual bread far thinner than
our forefathers did their Wheaton. Not that all architectural ornament is to be neglected,
even in the rudest periods, but let our houses first be lined with beauty, where they come
in contact with our lives, like the tenement of the shellfish, and not overlaid with it.
But, alas! I have been inside one or two of them, and know what they are lined with.
Though we are not so degenerate, but that we might possibly live in a cave or a wigwam
or wear skins to-day, it certainly is better to accept the advantages, though so dearly
offered. In such a neighborhood as this, boards and shingles, lime and bricks are cheaper
and more easily obtained than suitable caves, or whole logs, or bark in sufficient quantities,
or even well-tempered clay, or flat stones. I speak understandingly on this subject, for
I have made myself acquainted with it both theoretically and practically.
With a little more wit we might use these materials so as to become richer than the
richest now are, and make our civilization a blessing. The civilized man is a more experienced
and wiser savage, but to make haste to my own experiment. Near the end of March, 1845,
I borrowed an axe and went down to the woods by Walden Pond, nearest to where I intended
to build my house, and began to cut down some tall, arrowy white pines, still in their youth
for timber. It is difficult to begin without borrowing, but perhaps it is the most generous
course, thus to permit your fellow man to have an interest in your enterprise. The owner
of the axe, as he released his hold on it, said that it was the apple of his eye, but
I returned it sharper than I received it. It was a pleasant hillside where I worked,
covered with pine woods, through which I looked out on the pond, and a small open field in
the woods, where pines and hickories were springing up. The ice in the pond was not
yet dissolved, though there were some open spaces, and it was all dark-colored and saturated
with water. There were some slight flurries of snow during the days that I worked there,
but for the most part when I came out, on to the railroad on my way home, its yellow
sand-heap stretched away gleaming in the hazy atmosphere, and the rails shone in the spring
sun, and I heard the lark and powee and other birds already come to commence another year
with us. They were pleasant spring days, in which the winter of man's discontent was thawing
as well as the earth, and the life that had lain torpid began to stretch itself.
One day, when my axe had come off and I had cut a green hickory for a wedge, driving it
with a stone, and had placed the hole to soak in a pond-hole in order to swell the wood,
I saw a striped snake run into the water and he lay on the bottom, apparently without inconvenience,
as long as I stayed there, or more than a quarter of an hour, perhaps because he had
not yet fairly come out of the torpid state. It appeared to me that for a likely reason
men remain in their present low and primitive condition. But if they should feel the influence
of the spring of springs arousing them, they would of necessity rise to a higher and more
ethereal life. I had previously seen the snakes in frosty mornings in my path, with portions
of their body still numb and inflexible, waiting for the sun to thaw them. On the 1st of April
it rained and melted the ice, and in the early part of the day, which was very foggy,
I heard a stray goose groping about over the pond and cackling as if lost, or like the
spirit of the fog. So I went on for some days cutting and hewing
timber, and also studs and rafters, all with my narrow axe, not having many communicable
or scholar-like thoughts, singing to myself, Men say they know many things, but lo, they
have taken wings! The arts and sciences and a thousand appliances, the wind that blows
is all that anybody knows. I hewed the main timbers six inches square, most of the studs
on two sides only, and the rafters and floor timbers on one side, leaving the rest of the
bark on, so that they were just as straight and much stronger than the sawed ones. Each
had borrowed other tools by this time. My days in the woods were not very long ones,
yet I usually carried my dinner of bread and butter, and read the newspaper in which it
was wrapped, at noon, sitting amid the green pine boughs which I had cut off, and to my
bread was imparted some of their fragrance, for my hands were covered with a thick coat
of pitch. Before I had done I was more the friend than the foe of the pine tree, though
I had cut down some of them, having become better acquainted with it. Sometimes a rambler
in the wood was attracted by the sound of my axe, and we chatted pleasantly over the
chips which I had made. By the middle of April, for I made no haste in my work, but rather
made the most of it. My house was framed and ready for the raising. I had already bought
the shanty of James Collins, an Irishman who worked on the Fitchburg Railroad for boards.
James Collins' shanty was considered an uncommonly fine one. When I called to see it he was not
at home. I walked about the outside at first unobserved from within, the windows were so
deep and high. It was of small dimensions, with a peaked cottage roof, and not much
else to be seen, the dirt being raised five feet all around as if it were a compost heap.
The roof was the soundest part, though a good deal warped and made brittle by the sun. Door
still there was none but a perennial passage for the hens under the door-board. Mrs. C.
came to the door and asked me to view it from the inside. The hens were driven in by my
approach. It was dark, and had a dirt floor for the most part, dank, clammy, and egwish,
only here a board and there a board, which would not bear removal. She lighted a lamp
to show me the inside of the roof and the walls, and also that the board floor extended
under the bed, warning me not to step into the cellar, a sort of dust hole two feet deep.
In her own words they were good boards overhead, good boards all around, and a good window
of two whole squares originally, only the cat had passed out that way lately. There
was a stove, a bed, and a place to sit, an infant in the house where it was born, a silk
parasol, gilt-framed looking-glass, and a patent new coffee-mill nailed to an oak sapling,
all told.
The bargain was soon concluded, for James had in the meantime returned. I, to pay four
dollars and twenty-five cents tonight, he to vacate at five tomorrow morning, selling
to nobody else meanwhile, I to take possession at six. It were well, he said, to be there
early and anticipate certain indistinct but wholly unjust claims on the score of ground
rent and fuel. This, he assured me, was the only encumbrance.
At six I passed him and his family on the road. One large bundle held their all, bed,
coffee-mill, looking-glass, hens, all but the cat. She took to the woods and became
a wild cat, and, as I learned afterward, trod in a trap set for wood-chucks, and so
became a dead cat at last. I took down this dwelling the same morning, drawing the nails
and removed it to the pond-side by small cartloads, spreading the boards on the grass there to
bleach and warp back again in the sun. One early thrush gave me a note or two as I drove
along the woodland path. I was informed treacherously by a young Patrick that neighbour Seeley,
an Irishman, in the intervals of the carting, transferred the still tolerable, straight
and drivable nails, staples, and spikes to his pocket, and then stood when I came back
to pass the time of day and look freshly up, unconcerned with spring thoughts, at the devastation.
There being a dearth of work, as he said, he was there to represent spectatordom and
help make this seemingly insignificant event one with the removal of the gods of Troy.
I dug my cellar in the side of a hill sloping to the south, where a wood-chuck had formerly
dug his burrow, down through sumac and blackberry roots, and the lowest stain of vegetation,
six feet square by seven deep, to a fine sand where potatoes would not freeze in any winter.
The sides were left shelving and not stoned, but the sun having never shone on them the
sand still keeps its place. It was but two hours' work. I took particular pleasure in
this breaking of ground, for in almost all latitudes men dig into the earth for an equable
temperature. Under the most splendid house in the city is still to be found the cellar,
where they store their roots as of old, and long after the superstructure has disappeared
posterity remark its dent in the earth. The house is still but a sort of portico, and
a porch at the entrance of a burrow. At length in the beginning of May, with the help of
some of my acquaintances, rather to improve so good an occasion for neighborliness than
from any necessity, I set up the frame of my house. No man was ever more honored in
the character of his razors than I. They are destined, I trust, to assist at the raising
of loftier structures one day. I began to occupy my house on the fourth of July, as
soon as it was boarded and roofed, for the boards were carefully feather-edged and lapped,
so that it was perfectly impervious to rain. But before boarding I laid the foundation
of a chimney at one end, bringing two cartloads of stones up the hill from the pond in my
arms. I built the chimney after my hoeing in the fall, before a fire became necessary
for warmth, doing my cooking in the meanwhile out of doors on the ground, early in the morning,
which mode I still think is in some respects more convenient and agreeable than the usual
one. When it stormed before my bread was baked I fixed a few boards over the fire and sat
under them to watch my loaf, and passed some pleasant hours in that way. In those days
when my hands were much employed I read but little, but the least scraps of paper which
lay on the ground, my holder or tablecloth, afforded me as much entertainment, in fact
answered the same purpose as the Iliad. It would be worth the while to build still more
deliberately than I did, considering, for instance, what foundation a door, a window,
a cellar, a garret, have in the nature of man, and, perchance, never raising any superstructure
until we found a better reason for it than our temporal necessities even. There is some
of the same fitness in a man's building his own house that there is in a bird's building
its own nest. Who knows but if men constructed their dwellings with their own hands and provided
food for themselves and families simply and honestly enough the poetic faculty would be
universally developed as birds universally sing when they are so engaged. But, alas,
we do like cow-birds and cuckoos which lay their eggs in nests which other birds have
built, and cheer no traveller with their chattering and unmusical notes. Shall we forever resign
the pleasure of construction to the carpenter? What does architecture amount to in the experience
of the mass of men? I never in all my walks came across a man engaged in so simple and
natural an occupation as building his house. We belong to the community. It is not the
tailor alone who is the ninth part of a man. It is as much the preacher and the merchant
and the farmer. Where is this division of labour to end? And what object does it finally
serve? No doubt another may also think for me, but it is not therefore desirable that
he should do so to the exclusion of my thinking for myself. True, there are architects so
called in this country, and I have heard of one at least possessed with the idea of making
architectural ornaments have a core of truth, a necessity, and hence a beauty. But I do
not know of a beauty as if it were a revelation to him. All very well, perhaps from his point
of view, but only a little better than the common dilettantism. A sentimental reformer
in architecture he began at the cornice, not at the foundation. It was only how to put
a core of truth within the ornaments that every sugar plum, in fact, might have an almond
or caraway seed in it, though I hold that almonds are most wholesome without the sugar,
and not how the inhabitant, the indweller, might build truly within and without and let
the ornaments take care of themselves. What reasonable man ever supposed that ornaments
were something outward and in the skin merely, that the tortoise got his spotted shell, or
the shellfish its mother-of-pearl tints by such a contract as the inhabitants of Broadway
their Trinity Church. But a man has no more to do with the style of architecture of his
house than a tortoise with that of its shell. Nor need the soldier be so idle as to try
to paint the precise colour of his virtue on his standard. The enemy will find it out.
He may turn pale when the trial comes. This man seemed to me to lean over the cornice
and timidly whisper his half-truth to the rude occupants, who really knew it better
than he. What of architectural beauty I now see, I know has gradually grown from within
outward, out of the necessities and character of the indweller, who is the only builder,
out of some unconscious truthfulness and nobleness without ever a thought for the appearance
and what additional beauty of this kind is destined to be produced will be preceded by
a like unconscious beauty of life. The most interesting dwellings in this country, as
pretending, humble log huts and cottages of the poor commonly, it is the life of the
inhabitants whose shells they are, and not any peculiarity in their surfaces merely which
make them picturesque. And equally interesting will be the citizen's suburban box when his
life shall be as simple and as agreeable to the imagination, and there is as little straining
after effect in the style of his dwelling. A great proportion of architectural ornaments
are literally hollow, and a September gale would strip them off like borrowed plumes
without injury to the substantials. They can do without architecture, who have no olives
nor wines in the cellar. What if an equal ado were made about the ornaments of style
in literature, and the architects of our Bibles spent as much time about their cornices as
the architects of our churches do? So are made the belletres and the beaux-arts and
their professors. Much it concerns a man forsooth how a few sticks are slanted over him or under
him, and what colors are daubed upon his box. It would signify somewhat if, in any earnest
sense, he slanted them and daubed it. But the spirit, having departed out of the tenant,
it is of a piece with constructing his own coffin, the architecture of the grave. And
carpenter is but another name for coffin-maker. One man says, in his despair or indifference
to life, take up a handful of the earth at your feet and paint your house that color.
Is he thinking of his last and narrow house? Toss up a copper for it as well. What an abundance
of leisure he must have! Why do you take up a handful of dirt? Better paint your house
your own complexion. Let it turn pale or blush for you. An enterprise to improve the style
of cottage architecture. When you have got my ornaments ready, I will wear them.
Before winter I built a chimney, and shingled the sides of my house, which were already
impervious to rain, with imperfect and sappy shingles made of the first slice of the log
whose edges I was obliged to straighten with a plane. I have, thus, a tight shingled and
plastered house, ten feet wide by fifteen long, and eight feet posts, with a garret
and a closet, a large window on each side, two trap-doors, one door at the end, and a
compact cost of my house, paying the usual price for such materials as I used, but not
counting the work, all of which was done by myself, was as follows, and I give the details
because very few are able to tell exactly what their houses cost, and fewer still if
any the separate cost of the various materials which compose them. Boards. Eight dollars,
three cents plus. Mostly shanty boards. Refuse shingles for roof sides. Four dollars. Laths.
A dollar twenty-five. Two second-hand windows with glass. Two dollars, forty-three cents.
One thousand old brick. Four dollars. Two casks of lime. Two dollars, forty cents. Two
that was high. Hair. Thirty-one cents. More than I needed. Mantle-tree iron. Fifteen cents.
Nails. Three dollars, ninety cents. Hinges and screws. Fourteen cents. Latch. Ten cents.
Chalk. One cent. Transportation. One dollar, forty cents. I carried a good part on my back.
In all, twenty-eight dollars and twelve cents plus. These are all the materials, excepting
the timber, stones, and sand which I claimed by squatters right. I have also a small woodshed
adjoining, made chiefly of the stuff which was left after building the house. I intend
to build me a house which will surpass any on the main street in Concord in grandeur
and luxury, as soon as it pleases me as much and will cost me no more than my present one.
I thus found that the student who wishes for a shelter can obtain one for a lifetime at
an expense not greater than the rent which he now pays annually. If I seem to boast more
than is becoming, my excuse is that I brag for humanity rather than for myself, and my
shortcomings and inconsistencies do not affect the truth of my statement. Notwithstanding
much cant and hypocrisy, chaff which I find it difficult to separate from my wheat, but
for which I am as sorry as any man, I will breathe freely and stretch myself in this
respect. It is such a relief to both the moral and physical system, and I am resolved that
I will not, through humility, become the devil's attorney. I will endeavor to speak a good
word for the truth. At Cambridge College the mere rent of a student's room, which is only
a little larger than my own, is thirty dollars each year. Though the corporation had the
advantage of building thirty-two side by side and under one roof, and the occupant suffers
the inconvenience of many and noisy neighbors, and perhaps a residence in the fourth story,
I cannot but think that if we had more true wisdom in these respects, not only less education
would be needed, because for sooth more would already have been acquired, but the pecuniary
expense of getting an education would in a great measure vanish. Those conveniences which
the student requires at Cambridge or elsewhere cost him, or somebody else, ten times as great
a sacrifice of life as they would with proper management on both sides. Those things for
which the most money is demanded are never the things which the student most wants. Tuition,
for instance, is an important item in the term bill, while for the far more valuable
education which he gets by associating with the most cultivated of his contemporaries,
no charge is made. The mode of founding a college is, commonly, to get up a subscription
of dollars and cents, and then, following blindly the principles of a division of labor
to its extreme, a principle which should never be followed but with circumspection, to call
in a contractor who makes this a subject of speculation, and he employs Irishmen, or other
cooperatives, actually, to lay the foundations, while the students that are to be are said
to be fitting themselves for it, and for these oversights successive generations have to
pay. I think that it would be better than this for the students, or those who desire
to be benefited by it, even to lay the foundation themselves. The student who secures his coveted
leisure and retirement by systematically shirking any labor necessary to man obtains
but an ennoble and unprofitable leisure, defrauding himself of the experience which alone can
make leisure fruitful. But, says one, you do not mean that the students should go to
work with their hands instead of their heads? I do not mean that exactly, but I mean something
which he might think a good deal like that. I mean that they should not play life or study
it merely, while the community supports them at this expensive game, but earnestly live
it from beginning to end. How could youths better learn to live than by at once trying
the experiment of living? Methinks this would exercise their minds as much as mathematics?
If I wished a boy to know something about the arts and sciences, for instance, I would
not pursue the common course which is merely to send him into the neighborhood of some
professor, where anything is professed and practiced but the art of life, to survey the
world through a telescope or a microscope, and never with his natural eye, to study chemistry
and not learn how his bread is made, or mechanics, and not learn how it is earned, to discover
new satellites to Neptune, and not detect the motes in his eyes, or to what is known
as Vagabond, he is a satellite himself, or to be devoured by the monsters that swarm
all around him, while contemplating the monsters in a drop of vinegar.
Which would have advanced the most at the end of a month? The boy who had made his own
jack-knife from the ore which he had dug and smelted, reading as much as would be necessary
for this, or the boy who had attended the lectures on metallurgy at the Institute in
the meanwhile and had received a Rogers pen-knife from his father, which would be most likely
to cut his fingers. To my astonishment I was informed on leaving
college that I had studied navigation. Why, if I had taken one turn down the harbor I
should have known more about it. Even the poor student studies and is taught only political
economy, while that economy of living, which is synonymous with philosophy, is not even
sincerely professed in our colleges. The consequence is that while he is reading Adam Smith, recalling
Cardo and say, He runs his father in debt irretrievably.